Vaccines are under constant study. For a vaccine to be recommended—as part of the childhood and adolescent immunization schedule—it must be tested, found safe and closely monitored. Safety testing begins as soon as a new vaccine is made and clinical trials begin, and evidence of safety is gathered for as long as it is in use.

When it is time for your child to receive recommended vaccines, you may want to know more about vaccines and vaccine-preventable diseases. Pediatricians get a lot of the questions from parents about vaccines. Many questions are sparked by misinformation found online and on social media. No question is too big or too small. It is important to talk with y​our pediatrician.

What to know about vaccines
The child and adolescent immunization sched​ule is a policy that is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Like all AAP policies, it is developed based on expert review of all available evidence.

As a parent, you can be reassured to know that there have been hundreds of large-scale studies around the world on vaccine safety during the past few decades. They demonstrate that:

Recommended vaccines are safe for children and teens.

Vaccines are not associated with conditions like diabetes or problems with fertility.

Vaccines are not associated with autism or developmental delay.

Measles-containing vaccines are safe.

Vaccine ingredients are safe.

Research continues to confirm that vaccines are safe and effective—and they protect children and teens from serious diseases.

Association vs. causation
What do ice cream cone and air conditioner sales teach about vaccine studies?

In a study, if two things happen at the same time or one after another, researchers look closely for any way that one could affect the other. Two things can happen at the same time, but one does not always cause the other. For example, a store sells ice cream cones and air conditioners. The shopkeeper notices that when the store sells more ice cream cones, it also sells more air conditioners. There is an association between ice cream sales and air conditioning sales. However, one of these does not cause or lead to the other. When a person experiences a health problem after a vaccine, they can report it to the U.S. Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS)—even if the health problem was not caused by the vaccine. Read more about how VAERS is used as part of a larger safety monitoring system here.

Investigating vaccine safety: uncovering the truth
In 2011, British journalist Brian Deer investigated Dr. Andrew Wakefield (the man who initially claimed a link between autism and the MMR vaccine). A 2011 BMJ feature article Secrets of the MMR Scare: How the Case Against the MMR Vaccine Was Fixed explores Wakefield's practices during the study that was published on the alleged connection between MMR vaccine and autism. The article also uncovers truths that lead to the decision to take away Dr. Wakefield's medical license and the retraction of the study published on the subject. The 1998 study was cited more than 600 times before it was retracted in 2010. The retracted study serves as an example of how easily misinformation could spread about vaccines and how difficult it has been to disprove the misinformation. After the study was published, vast resources were used to respond to these theories that could have been put toward new research.

More evidence on the Wakefield study is presented in a 2021 PLoS One study, Quantifying the effect of Wakefield et al. (1998) on skepticism about MMR vaccine safety in the U.S., and 2019 JAMA original investigation, "Assessment of Citations of the Retracted Article by Wakefield et al With Fraudulent Claims of an Association Between Vaccination and Autism."

On Feb. 12, 2009, the U.S. Court of Federal Claims (also called the "vaccine court") ruled in three test cases, finding the scientific evidence to be overwhelmingly contrary to the theory that MMR vaccine and the vaccine preservative thimerosal are linked to autism.