Key points
Flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses
Flu can cause mild to severe illness
Most experts believe that flu viruses spread mainly by tiny droplets made when people with flu cough, sneeze, or talk
The first and most important step in preventing flu is to get a flu vaccine each year.Understanding Influenza
Flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs. It can cause mild to severe illness, and at times can lead to death. The best way to prevent flu is by getting a flu vaccine each year.

Symptoms
Flu can cause mild to severe illness, and at times can lead to death. Flu symptoms usually come on suddenly. People who have flu often feel some or all of these signs and symptoms:

fever* or feeling feverish/chills
cough
sore throat
runny or stuffy nose
muscle or body aches
headaches
fatigue (tiredness)
some people may have vomiting and diarrhea, though this is more common in children than adults.
*It's important to note that not everyone with flu will have a fever.

Not everyone with flu has symptoms

Some people with influenza virus infections do not develop any symptoms at all. A household study conducted during the 2017-2023 flu seasons found that 8 percent of people who tested positive for flu did not have symptoms.

Keep Reading
Similarities and Differences between Flu and COVID-19
How long it takes for signs to show
Period of Contagiousness
You may be able to spread flu to someone else before you know you are sick, as well as when you are sick with symptoms.

People with flu are most contagious during the first three days of their illness.
Some otherwise healthy adults may be able to infect others beginning one day before symptoms develop and up to five to seven days after becoming sick.
Some people, including young children and people with weakened immune systems, may be contagious for longer periods of time.
Onset of Symptoms
The time from when a person is exposed and infected with influenza virus to when symptoms begin is about two days but can range from about one to four days.

People at risk
Anyone can get flu (including healthy people), and serious problems related to flu can happen at any age, but some people are at higher risk of developing serious flu-related complications if they get sick. This includes people 65 years and older, people of any age with certain chronic medical conditions (such as asthma, diabetes, or heart disease), people with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 kg/m2 or higher, those who are pregnant, and children younger than five years.

How it spreads
Most experts believe that flu viruses spread mainly by tiny droplets made when people with flu cough, sneeze, or talk. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby. Less often, a person might get flu by touching a surface or object that has flu virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose or possibly their eyes.

Prevention
The first and most important step in preventing flu is to get a flu vaccine each year. Flu vaccine has been shown to reduce flu-related illnesses and the risk of serious flu complications that can result in hospitalization or even death. CDC also recommends everyday preventive actions (like staying away from people who are sick (distancing), covering coughs and sneezes, frequent handwashing, and taking steps for cleaner air) to help slow the spread of germs that cause respiratory (nose, throat, and lungs) illnesses like flu. More information is available about core and additional prevention strategies.

Quick facts
U.S annual flu infection rates
A 2018 CDC study published in Clinical Infectious Diseases looked at the percentage of the U.S. population who got sick with flu using two different methods and compared the findings. Both methods had similar findings, which suggested that on average, about 8 percent of the U.S. population gets sick from flu each season, with a range of between 3 percent and 11 percent, depending on the season.

Groups most likely to get sick from flu
The same CID study found that children are most likely to get sick from flu and that people 65 and older are least likely to get sick from flu. Median incidence values (or attack rate) by age group were 9.3% for children 0-17 years, 8.8% for adults 18-64 years, and 3.9% for adults 65 years and older. This means that children younger than 18 are more than twice as likely to develop a symptomatic influenza virus infection than adults 65 and older.

Estimating seasonal flu incidence
Influenza virus infection is very common, and the number of people infected each season can only be estimated because not everyone will seek medical care or get tested for flu. Statistical estimations are based on CDC-measured flu hospitalization rates that are adjusted to estimate the total number of influenza virus infections in the United States for a given flu season.

The estimates for the number of influenza virus infections are then divided by the census population to estimate how common influenza virus infections are in the population (called seasonal incidence or attack rate).

Impact of flu season severity on incidence of flu
The proportion of people who get sick with flu varies. A paper published in CID found that between 3 percent and 11 percent of the U.S. population gets infected and develops flu symptoms each year. The 3 percent estimate is from the 2011-2012 season, which was an H1N1-predominant season classified as being of low severity. The estimated incidence of flu illness during two seasons was around 11 percent; 2012-2013 was an H3N2-predominant season classified as being of moderate severity, while 2014-2015 was an H3N2 predominant season classified as being of high severity.

Complications of Flu
Complications of flu can include bacterial pneumonia, ear infections, sinus infections and worsening of chronic medical conditions, such as congestive heart failure, asthma, or diabetes.

Testing and diagnosis
It is very difficult to distinguish flu from other viral or bacterial respiratory illnesses based on symptoms alone. There are tests available to diagnose flu.

Treatment overview
Flu antiviral drugs are prescription medicines (pills, liquid, an inhaled powder, or an intravenous solution) that fight against flu viruses in your body. Antiviral drugs are not sold over the counter. You can only get them if you have a prescription from a health care provider. Antiviral drugs are different from antibiotics, which fight against bacterial infections. Antiviral drugs for flu only work to treat flu. Flu antiviral drugs are different than antiviral drugs used to treat other infectious diseases such as COVID-19. Antiviral drugs prescribed to treat COVID-19 are not approved or recommended to treat flu.

Treatment of flu with flu antiviral medications works best when started within 1-2 days after flu symptoms begin. Flu antiviral drugs can lessen symptoms and shorten the time you are sick by about a day. Starting antiviral treatment shortly after symptoms begin also can help reduce some flu complications. For adults hospitalized with flu, some studies have reported that early antiviral treatment can reduce the duration of hospitalization and their risk of death.

Recommended antiviral drugs for this flu season
There are four FDA-approved antiviral drugs recommended by CDC to treat flu this season.

oseltamivir phosphate (available as a generic version or under the trade name Tamiflu®),
zanamivir (trade name Relenza®),
peramivir (trade name Rapivab®), and
baloxavir marboxil (trade name Xofluza®).
Oseltamivir
Generic oseltamivir and Tamiflu® are available as a pill or liquid suspension and are FDA approved for early treatment of flu in people 14 days and older.

Zanamivir
Zanamivir is a powdered medication that is inhaled and approved for early treatment of flu in people 7 years and older. Note: Zanamivir (trade name Relenza®) is administered using an inhaler device and is not recommended for people with breathing problems like asthma or COPD. Oseltamivir and zanamivir are given twice a day for five days.

Peramivir
Peramivir is given once intravenously by a health care provider and is approved for early treatment of flu in people 6 months and older.

Baloxavir
Baloxavir is a pill given as a single dose by mouth and is approved for early treatment of flu in children 5 years to younger than 12 years who do not have any chronic medical conditions, and for all people 12 years and older. Note: Baloxavir (trade name Xofluza®) is not recommended for treatment of flu during pregnancy or while breastfeeding, or in outpatients with complicated or progressive illness because there is no information about use of baloxavir in these patients. Baloxavir is also not recommended for treatment of flu in hospitalized patients due to limited data.

Who should take antiviral drugs
It's very important that flu antiviral drugs are started as soon as possible to treat patients who are:

hospitalized with flu,
people who are very sick with flu but who do not need to be hospitalized, and
people who are at increased risk of serious flu complications based on their age or underling health conditions, if they develop flu symptoms. For example, people with asthma and chronic lung disease, diabetes, or heart disease are at higher risk, as well as pregnant women.
Although patients with mild illness who are not at higher risk for flu complications may also be treated with antiviral drugs, most do not need to be.

Children can take flu antiviral drugs, though this varies by medication. Oseltamivir is recommended by CDC for treatment of flu in children beginning from birth and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends oseltamivir for treatment of flu in children 2 weeks old or older.

Oseltamivir is available as an oral suspension for children.
Zanamivir is approved for early treatment of flu in people 7 years and older, though it is not recommended for use in children with underlying respiratory disease, including asthma and other chronic lung diseases.
Peramivir is approved for early treatment in people 6 months and older.
Baloxavir is available in a single dose tablet for children 5 years and older.
If your child's health care provider prescribes oseltamivir capsules for your child and your child cannot swallow capsules, but the pediatric liquid suspension is not available, the prescribed capsules may be opened, mixed with a thick sweetened liquid, and given that way.

Pregnancy
Oral oseltamivir is recommended for treatment of flu during pregnancy because compared to other recommended antiviral medications, it has the most studies available to suggest that it is safe and beneficial during pregnancy. Baloxavir is not recommended during pregnancy or while breastfeeding, as there are no available efficacy or safety data.

When antiviral drugs should be taken
Antiviral treatment provides the greatest benefit when started soon after flu illness begins. Studies show that flu antiviral drugs work best for treatment when they are started within two days of getting sick. However, starting them later can still be beneficial, especially if the sick person is at higher risk of serious flu complications or is in the hospital with more severe illness. Follow instructions for taking these drugs. Follow your doctor's instructions and the dose, frequency, and duration listed on the label instructions for taking these drugs.What not to do
Antibiotics will not treat flu
When antibiotics aren't needed, they won't help you, and their side effects could still cause harm. Side effects can range from mild reactions, like a rash, to more serious health problems. These problems can include severe allergic reactions, antimicrobial-resistant infections and C. diff infection. C. diff causes diarrhea that can lead to severe colon damage and death.

Possible side effects
Possible side effects vary for each flu antiviral medication. The most common side effects reported for oseltamivir are nausea and vomiting. Zanamivir can cause bronchospasm (difficulty breathing with wheezing), and peramivir can cause diarrhea. Other less common side effects also have been reported. Your health care provider can give you more information about these drugs or you can check the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for specific information about antiviral drugs, including the manufacturer's package insert.

Prevention
Antiviral drugs are not a substitute for getting a flu vaccine. While flu vaccine can vary in effectiveness from season-to-season, a flu vaccine is best way to help prevent seasonal flu and its potentially serious complications. Everyone 6 months and older should receive a flu vaccine every year. Antiviral drugs are a second line of defense that can be used to treat flu (including seasonal flu and novel influenza viruses) if you get sick.