Sepsis is a clinical syndrome defined by a systemic response to infection. With progression to sepsis-associated organ failure (ie, severe sepsis) or hypotension (ie, septic shock) mortality increases. Sepsis is a cause of considerable mortality, morbidity, cost, and health care utilization. Abnormalities in the inflammation, immune, coagulation, oxygen delivery, and utilization pathways play a role in organ dysfunction and death. Early identification of septic patients allows for evidence-based interventions, such as prompt antibiotics, goal-directed resuscitation, and activated protein C. Appropriate care for sepsis may be more easily delivered by dividing this clinical entity into various stages and with changes in structures of delivery that extend across traditional boundaries. Better description of the molecular basis of the disease process also will allow for more targeted therapies.
Keywords Critical care, Multi-organ failure syndrome, Sepsis, Septic, shock, Severe sepsis
Despite the frequency, mortality, morbidity, and cost of sepsis, explicit patient phenotypes are lacking. Sepsis is defined by nonspecific clinical criteria that do not discriminate differences in underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. With recognition of the major public health implications and resource utilization associated with the syndrome, there is a growing awareness of sepsis and a need for an organized approach to caring for affected patients that crosses traditional structures of care.

Clinical Significance
Sepsis accounts for 9% of all deaths in the US.
The clinical criteria for sepsis do not discriminate differences in underlying pathophysiology, hindering development and application of effective therapies.
An organized, multidisciplinary approach to sepsis care might improve outcomes and provide greater benefit than new therapeutic agents.
Evidence-based treatment of sepsis includes prompt antimicrobial therapy, early resuscitation, activated protein C, and other interventions as appropriate.

Burden of Sepsis
There are approximately 750,000 cases of sepsis in the US annually.5,6 Sepsis is involved in approximately 2% of all hospitalizations, and there will be more than 1 million cases of sepsis per year in the US by 2020. Hospital mortality for sepsis patients ranges from 18% to 30%, depending on the series. While the mortality rate has decreased over the past 20 years, an increase in the number of sepsis cases has resulted in a tripling of the number of sepsis-related deaths. An estimated 215,000 deaths (9.3% of all deaths) in the US occurred in patients with sepsis. In the US, care for septic patients results in hospital costs exceeding $16 billion, requires an average of 20 hospital days, and involves intensive care unit (ICU) admission in more than half of the cases. Reported costs do not include posthospitalization care or indirect costs due to delay in functional recovery. These costs may be considerable, because almost one third of survivors require intermediate care.5
Clinical Risk Factors for Sepsis
A number of clinical risk factors for sepsis have been identified (Table 2).5,7-13 Causal mechanisms have not been clearly defined, and some of these factors may not have an independent association with sepsis but rather may represent other unmeasured covariates. While bacteria are often considered the sole causative agents, any microorganism can cause sepsis, including fungi, parasites, and viruses. Respiratory and intra-abdominal infections are the most common associated sites of infection.6 Gram-positive now outnumber Gram-negative organisms as causes of sepsis. Cases of fungal infection leading to sepsis are increasing rapidly and cause up to 15% of cases.5 In a sizeable minority of patients with the clinical presentation of sepsis, no causative organisms are found.14 However, if infection is the suspected cause of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, the patient should be considered septic despite negative culture results, and appropriate antisepsis therapy should be instituted.

Pathogenesis
Because sepsis is defined as a syndrome, it is likely that heterogeneous pathophysiologic processes are contained under this single term. The interaction of microbiological products with a host that is susceptible due to genetic or other factors induces a cascade of immunomodulatory mediators, leading to cellular and organ dysfunction. The major pathways involved in sepsis include the innate immune response, inflammatory cascades, procoagulant and antifibrinolytic pathways, alterations in cellular metabolism and signaling, and acquired immune dysfunction. A full review of the pathophysiology of sepsis is beyond the scope of the current review, but several recent sources are available.15-17
Immunity and Inflammation
Toll-like receptors are a class of pattern recognition molecules on immune and other cells that respond to the presence of microbiological products as part of innate immunity.17-19 This class of receptors has a wide variety of functions,20 but in the context of sepsis, a major outcome of Toll-like receptor engagement is the induction of pro-inflammatory mediators and activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB).21-23 NF-κB is integrally involved in a cascade formerly known as “cytokine storm” associated with increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α. Other receptors, including those for complement, coagulation factors, and leukotrienes, augment and modify the Toll-like receptor-associated response.24-27 Leukocytes are activated and recruited to the tissues directly affected by infection as well as those of distant organs. Adhesion molecules are expressed on the endothelium and participate in the recruitment of immune cells.28,29 The complement cascade is activated in sepsis with effects on inflammation and coagulation.30 Inducible nitric oxide synthase is up-regulated, leading to nitric oxide release, smooth muscle relaxation, local vasodilation, and systemic vasodilation.31,32 While pro-inflammatory mediators predominate in the first few hours after sepsis onset, an anti-inflammatory reaction, including release of cytokines, such as interleukin-10, follows.33 Within 24 hours of sepsis onset, abnormalities in coagulation and release of proinflammatory late mediators, such as high-mobility group box-1, are found.17,34
Coagulation Abnormalities
Pro-inflammatory cytokines and complement activate the coagulation cascade in septic patients.35,36 Tissue factor is expressed on immune and endothelial cells, contributing to the activation of the extrinsic coagulation system pathway that results in conversion of factor VII to an active protease.37 Proinflammatory molecules and the interaction of Toll-like receptors with microbial products up-regulate expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).38-40 Such events produce an initial activation of endothelial cells, coagulation, and fibrinolysis followed by a prolonged suppression of fibrinolysis as PAI-1 levels increase. An imbalance toward a procoagulant state results, especially in the micro-circulation.15,41,42 Decreases in endogenous anticoagulants, including protein C, tissue factor pathway inhibitor, and antithrombin, coupled with elevated circulating and tissue levels of PAI-1, are observed in the majority of septic patients.15 Components of the coagulation and fibrinolytic system, particularly PAI-1 and urokinase, are elevated for prolonged periods in septic patients and have substantial proinflammatory effects that may contribute to organ dysfunction.43,44
Cellular Metabolism
Abnormalities in lipid, carbohydrate, and protein metabolism occur in septic patients.45-48 Inadequate oxygen delivery due to alterations in capillary blood flow and decreased cardiac output may contribute to increased anaerobic metabolism and lactate production.49 However, even in the presence of adequate tissue oxygen delivery, sepsis may cause impaired cellular oxygen extraction and utilization due to mitochondrial dysfunction. Sepsis-associated inhibition of cellular oxygen utilization and other metabolic pathways may lead to decreased production of oxygen radicals by some populations of dysfunctional cells.50 This cellular “hibernation” may explain the absence of cell necrosis when failing organs from fatal cases of sepsis are examined.51
Immunosuppression and Depletion
Circulating monocytes, but not neutrophils, from septic patients are hyporesponsive to proinflammatory stimuli when compared with normal cells.52 Additionally, there is increased apoptosis of circulating lymphocyte and splenic dendritic cells in patients dying of severe sepsis.53 This may contribute to mortality because inhibition of lymphocyte apoptosis through over-expression of anti-apoptotic molecules, such as Bcl-2, results in improved survival in experimental models.54,55 Enhanced apoptosis of lymphoid cell populations, as well as diminished monocyte response, may increase the risk of nosocomial infections, a cause of considerable mortality in critically ill patients who survive their initial septic episode. Enhanced sepsis-induced apoptosis also may play a role in the loss of cells in the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract.56,57 While apoptosis may be adaptive to repair damaged tissues, increased cellular apoptosis also may contribute to organ dysfunction and immunosuppression in sepsis.53
Recognition and Treatment
Septic patients present with a variety of signs and symptoms, and recognition requires consideration of the diagnosis. Sepsis may occur in ambulatory offices, at extended care facilities, in emergency departments, on the general ward, or in the ICU. Structures and processes of care should be considered that extend beyond traditional borders within the health care continuum. As is encouraged in the care of patients with myocardial infarction, care may be divided into different stages based on effectiveness and urgency. Early emphasis in myocardial infarction patients is on hemodynamic stabilization and opening of the occluded vessel. Focus then shifts to secondary prevention, recovery, and rehabilitation. Various studies suggest that an approach to sepsis centered on a similar organized approach to septic patients, involving “bundles” of care, might improve outcome.58,59
Recognition
To activate a therapeutic pathway (Figure), the clinician must recognize patients with a qualifying diagnosis. All patients with a suspected infection should have vital signs and a white blood cell count, and differential measured as soon as possible. A search for sepsis-induced organ dysfunction (Table 3) should follow rapidly (eg, within 2 hours) to identify severe sepsis, patients at increased risk of death, and candidates for specific therapies. Initial treatment should proceed in concert with evaluation for organ dysfunction. Because the incidence of sepsis in patients is high and specific treatment exists, it is favorable to err on the side of initial over-diagnosis.

Resuscitation Phase
The earliest goals are to assess and secure the airway, to provide adequate volume resuscitation, and to administer appropriate antimicrobial therapy. In patients with respiratory or hemodynamic compromise, life-sustaining efforts are the first priority. In all patients, obtaining appropriate cultures and immediate administration of broad-spectrum antimicrobials should be included in the initial approach. Delayed administration of appropriate antimicrobials is associated with poorer outcomes.60 Choices of agents should be guided by suspected site of infection, anticipated pathogens, penetration of adequate levels into infected tissues, and local patterns of antibiotic susceptibility (Table 4).

Early intervention is particularly beneficial for patients with septic shock or evidence of organ hypoperfusion (eg, elevated serum lactate levels, diminished urine output, or hypoxemia). Intubation and mechanical ventilation is recommended for patients with respiratory compromise to maintain oxygenation and acid-base status, and to mitigate diversion of the compromised circulation to the respiratory muscles. The value of rapid resuscitation directed by objective measures is illustrated by reduced observed mortality in the experimental group of a study among septic patients presenting to an emergency department.61 The protocol included continuous measurement of central venous oxygen saturation as a measure of oxygen delivery-extraction balance, and used fluids, vasopressors, red blood cell transfusions, and inotrope therapy for 6 hours after identification of hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg) or elevated serum lactate (>4 mmol/L). Other studies of early resuscitative interventions support the findings of this single-center study.62,63 The superiority of a particular protocol remains to be established and is being examined in a multi-centered National Institutes of Health-funded study.
A central venous catheter is often necessary for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Subclavian and internal jugular catheters provide advantages over femoral catheters in monitoring capabilities and in reducing infectious and thrombotic complications.64 There are few data to support the superiority of use of crystalloid or colloid solutions for resuscitation.65 Different catecholamine vasopressor agents have not been compared in large studies, but observational and hemodynamic studies suggest that norepinephrine may be preferred.66,67 Vasopressin, a noncatecholamine vasopressor, currently lacks compelling data to endorse its routine use.15
Routine corticosteroid replacement in septic shock for critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency remains controversial. An inadequate response to synthetic corticotrophin (ACTH; defined as ≤9 mg/dL increase in cortisol level 1 hour after administration of 250 μg ACTH) is present in the majority of patients with septic shock.68 For septic patients with hypotension unresponsive to fluids, requirement for mechanical ventilation, and the presence of an additional sepsis-associated organ failure, administration of low doses of corticosteroids improved mortality in patients with inadequate responses to ACTH but not in those with normal responses.69 In this study, the average time to treatment was approximately 7 hours after shock onset. Because of difficulties in determining ACTH responsiveness within this interval, a reasonable course is to perform an ACTH stimulation test and start corticosteroid treatment only in those with vasopressor-dependent shock, respiratory failure, and an additional organ failure as soon as possible after onset. Corticosteroids can be discontinued in patients with an adequate response to ACTH.
Initial Management Phase
Following the resuscitation phase of sepsis, treatment shifts to consolidation of care. Further diagnostic testing to detect likely pathogens and sites of infection may be appropriate. Control of the source of infection, including the removal of indwelling catheters, drainage of collections of pus, and surgical debridement, may be needed. Discussions about likely prognosis and goals of care with the patient and family are appropriate considering the considerable mortality and morbidity attributable to sepsis.
For severe sepsis patients at a high risk of death, such as those with multiorgan failure or elevated severity of illness (eg, APACHE II score ≥25), drotrecogin alfa (activated) (recombinant activated protein C) should be administered if there are no contraindications.70 The most significant side effect of this agent is bleeding. Patients at greatest risk of bleeding are those with severe thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, or an increased risk of intracranial bleeding. For patients with high risk of death and without such contraindications, the risk of bleeding is counterbalanced by an absolute reduction in mortality. Drotrecogin alfa (activated) does not appear to be effective in patients at a low risk of death and may be harmful in those with recent surgery and single organ dysfunction.71
A considerable number of severe sepsis patients will develop acute lung injury. In these patients, lower tidal volumes (eg, 6 mL/kg predicted body weight) and maintenance of plateau airway pressure below 30 cmH2O improves mortality and organ failure, compared with traditional larger tidal volumes.72 For mechanically ventilated septic patients without lung injury, lower tidal volume ventilation may prevent its development.73 Recent studies have not shown benefit from the routine use of pulmonary artery catheters in patients with acute lung injury,74 but have demonstrated diminished time on the ventilator with a conservative fluid strategy (eg, keeping central venous pressures <4 mm Hg).75 Such a strategy was restricted to patients without shock or other signs of inadequate organ perfusion.
Maintenance Phase
For septic patients surviving 24 hours, attention should turn to preventing nosocomial complications and restoring premorbid functioning. As cultures are available, antimicrobial choices, doses, and durations of therapy should be customized. Hyperglycemia is a common occurrence in critically ill patients and, in select populations, particularly postoperative patients, strict control (eg, maintenance of serum glucose at 80-110 mg/dL) may provide benefit by reducing nosocomial infections and improving survival.76 The effectiveness of such therapy in patients with sepsis or in medical intensive care units is not proven and risks of hypoglycemia should be carefully considered.77 Anemia occurs frequently in critically ill patients, but transfusions (after the initial resuscitation phase) may be harmful, particularly by increasing the risk of nosocomial infections.78 Among nonbleeding patients, hemoglobin values as low as 7 mg/dL are acceptable, and there is no apparent benefit for maintaining higher levels with transfusion.79 Avoidance of nosocomial complications also may be reduced in selected patients with the use of semi-recumbent positioning,80 stress ulcer prophylaxis,81 thromboembolism prophylaxis,82 and close attention to hand-washing.83
As the patient stabilizes, de-escalation of invasive monitoring and life support is indicated. Liberation from mechanical ventilation at the earliest appropriate time reduces the risk of ventilator-associated complications. Judicious sedation, including daily “holidays” from sedatives, can reduce the number of ventilator and ICU days.84 Assessment of readiness for liberation from the ventilator with spontaneous breathing trials triggered by protocols based on patient recovery, rather than physician discretion, reduces mechanical ventilation time.85 In patients expected to require prolonged mechanical ventilation, early tracheostomy may reduce mortality, length of stay, and infectious complications.86
Recovery Phase
Mortality for sepsis survivors is higher than age-matched controls for at least 5 years.87 The mechanism of this effect is unknown. Additionally, survivors of critical illness may suffer considerable physical and psychological morbidity.88 Small interventional studies utilizing ICU follow-up clinics and patient education initiatives following critical care demonstrate variable results.89,90
Conclusion
Sepsis is a major cause of mortality and morbidity, and is a source of substantial health care costs. The current definition provides easy identification of affected patients but, because of the heterogeneity of patients included, may have hampered the ability to develop effective therapies and to better classify disease. Other areas of medicine, such as oncology, have learned the value in greater description of disease based on biological mechanisms for prognostic and therapeutic purposes.91-93 It is likely that therapeutic advances in preventing and treating sepsis will be facilitated by such an approach.94
Sepsis is a condition that involves health care providers from many disciplines and in a variety of settings. As a result, organization of therapeutic efforts for these patients requires coordination across traditional boundaries of medicine. A concerted, multidisciplinary approach to sepsis based on patient needs, rather than physical location, may provide greater benefit than new therapeutic agents.